---
layout: post
title:  "First ADU Ordinance Draft"
date: 2019-8-4 16:00:00 -0500
tags: [ Lexington, development, ADUs ]
description: "Lexington's Planning staff have released their first proposed
draft of an ADU ordinance, let's dive into it."
---

After over a year since I attended my first meeting to discuss ADUs, Lexington's
planning staff have released their proposed changes to the zoning ordinance
that would allow Accessory Dwelling Units. You can find the proposed draft
[here](http://bit.ly/ADU-ord0718) as well as a nice, succinct presentation
[here](http://bit.ly/ADU-pres0718). Overall I love it and was even surprised at
how little is restricted, but this may be because this is the first proposal and
the old persuasion trick of asking for $1000 first so that they are more willing
to give you $100 may be at work here. So let's dive into it.

#### The Good

Most of it. Like there is very little I would change from what has been
proposed. First, no minimum lot size. This is great as it will still allow 
smaller lots to have ADUs. Most of our older, more desirable neighborhoods have
smaller lots and this will allow more people to enjoy them. There will probably
be some push back against this, but I think there are plenty of other
protections that will prevent any out of scale ADUs.

One ADU per lot with a max size of 800 sqft. I'm ok with both of these
restrictions. Ideally there wouldn't be either a lot limit or size limit, but I
think these balance out the no minimum lot size. They prevent out of scale ADUs
and I don't see many people willing and able to build more than one, so I doubt
it will do much to discourage development.

No owner occupied requirement*. This is a huge deal and I wasn't expecting it as
requiring the owner to live in either unit is an easy "fix" to a lot of
neighborhood complaints (regardless of how valid those complaints are). But it
can also be a poison pill, restricting development where it would be most
beneficial. I'm just going to echo the staff's presentation because their
reasoning is spot on; we don't require owner occupancy in any of our residential
zones, owner occupancy requirements are a barrier to financing, and other cities
have tried it and undone it as it substantially limits development. It does have
one caveat though; if either the primary residence or the ADU is used as a short
term rental, then the property owner is required to live in the other dwelling.
I think this is totally understandable and will go far to ease worries of ADUs
springing up as hotels in neighborhoods. I imagine there will be a lot of push
back to require owner occupancy, but if we can manage to avoid it, I think the
city as a whole will benefit from it.

Finally, the number one thing I was worried about, NO REQUIRED PARKING!!!! This
is another huge win if we can keep it through to an adopted ordinance. Ask 
anyone with an iota of urban planning interest and they will tell you how bad
parking minimums (requiring a minimum amount of parking) are. They can be 
substantial barriers to development and force parking where it may not be
needed. Not having required parking also helps ADUs fit on smaller lots, often
the places they will be of the most benefit. This will probably have the usual
fear mongering of over crowded street parking, but I seriously doubt enough ADUs
will go in on any one street for this to actually be a concern.

#### The Not Great

All this praise isn't to say that I agree with the proposed ordinance 100%.
First there is this line about entrances that I don't fully understand:

<div class="card w-50 mx-auto mb-4 p-auto">
  <p class="card-body text-muted">
    Only one pedestrian entrance to the structure may be located on the primary
    wall plane of the dwelling unit.
  </p>
</div>

There doesn't seem to be a distinction between attached or detached and doesn't
mention which dwelling unit it refers to, the ADU or primary residence. So it
makes it seem like you can't have both entrances to the primary unit and ADU on
the front wall. If I'm understanding that correctly I think that would be a huge
mistake as it will prevent many attached garage conversions, as most attached
garages face the front.

My other concern is that detached ADUs must be located behind the rear wall of
the principal residence. I don't think this is as detrimental as the entrance
rule, but I do think it puts needless limits in place. I would want to see this
at least eased to requiring detached ADUs to be behind the front wall of the
primary residence, as this would allow the buildings to be staggered.

#### 99.9% Great

Overall I think the proposed ordinance is great! As this is just the first
iteration proposal, there are still many opportunities for that to change
though. Planning staff will be hosting a public input event on August 20th at
6pm at the Lexington Senior Center. I strongly encourage anyone interested in
more housing options in Lexington to attend. You can RSVP
[here](http://bit.ly/ADU-event-0820) (it's free) or, if you can't make it, you
can still give feedback [here](http://bit.ly/adu-form-0820) (the form remain
open for comments until 5pm on August 23rd). I think this is a great start and
if we can see it through to an adopted ordinance it has the potential to go a
long way in building a better Lexington for everyone.