---
layout: post
title:  "Re-legalize Housing"
tags: [ Lexington, development, zoning ]
date:   2019-2-11 9:00:00 -0500
---

Lexington, like the rest of the country, is facing a housing crisis. Ours may
not be as bad as larger cities, but we are in one nonetheless. A lack of supply,
and variety, has increased existing property values, bringing up housing costs
and rent with it. One solution to this is doing what we used to do, build more
housing of more variety. Many people look around and see our >60% single family
housing as something ordained by the market. There aren't more duplexes or
fourplexes simply because people don't want to live in them. But it's more
likely because we all but outlaw them. While duplexes and other small apartment
buildings seamlessly blend into existing neighborhoods, our zoning ordinance
makes them borderline impossible to build. Those requirements make a lot of our
existing housing stock, especially in and around downtown, illegal to build
today. Let's look at some of those requirements.

![3 unit building in Kenwick]({{site.baseurl}}/assets/img/illegal-housing-1.png)

#### Parking

If you're building single family homes, Lexington has a straightforward parking
requirement, 1 parking spot per dwelling, and while I'd rather see no required
parking, it is the absolute minimum. But common sense and reasonability go out
the window the second you try to build a duplex. Lexington requires 2 parking
spots for dwelling in a duplex, so 4 spots total. Why a family in a duplex needs
anymore parking than a family in a single family home is beyond me. But the real
problem is how this makes it impossible to build duplexes in the areas that
would benefit from them most. The issue is the amount of space off street
parking requires. Areas where duplexes would be most desirable are typically
denser and older parts of Lexington. These areas also typically have smaller
lots. When you have to devote so much space for parking spots, and the driveways
to get in and out of them, it adds up and removes a lot of land that could
otherwise be used for yards or housing. The result of this is that small lots
are either stuck being single family or maybe a small duplex with more driveway
than yard.

![Duplexes in Kenwick]({{site.baseurl}}/assets/img/illegal-housing-5.png)

While the parking rules for duplexes are the most insane, hefty requirements for
larger apartments have the effect of hampering density and development. For
multifamily buildings with over 2 units there are two formulas that dictate
parking requirements; 3 spaces for every 2 units, or 0.9 spaces per bedroom,
whichever is greater. The 3 for 2 rule really only ever applies to 1 bedroom
units as 2+ bedroom units will always have the 0.9 rule give a higher number.
But the 3 for 2 rule still has me asking "Does a family in a multifamily
unit need more parking than a family in a single family unit?"

Ever notice how most new apartment buildings in Lexington are a mix of 
1 and 2 bedroom units? I'm willing to bet that the 0.9 rule is the reason. It
drastically increases the number of parking spots required, and thereby the
cost, when you increase the number of bedrooms. This means a building with 10
2 bedroom units needs 18 spaces, while a building with 10 3 bedroom units
requires 27 spaces! That's a lot of asphalt that could be something more useful.
It's even worse if you compare equivalent single family homes; 10 3 bedroom
homes need only 10 spaces total, but if those same families were in one building
the city would require almost 3 times the parking. Again: "Does a family in a
multifamily unit need more parking than a family in a single family unit?"

#### Setbacks and Frontage

Two other aspects of our zoning code that hamper good urban development are
setbacks and minimum frontage requirements. Setbacks are the required space
between a building and the property line and frontage is essentially the width
of the lot. These requirements are the biggest reason many of our older
neighborhoods would be illegal to build today. My own neighborhood Kenwick is
probably one of the biggest violators. Many of our lots are under well under the
required 60' width but our small lots makes for a more interesting streetscape.
Almost all of the side yards are smaller than the required 6' width and our
front yards are closer to the street than the 30' required but this makes it
easier to talk to neighbors from my front porch as they walk by. Setbacks also
have other
[problems](https://www.strongtowns.org/journal/2017/10/23/the-problem-with-setbacks),
as well.

![Multiunit near UK]({{site.baseurl}}/assets/img/illegal-housing-3.png)

I'm not sure what the reason for requiring such wide lots, but setbacks are
often argued for as means to lower fire risk. The thinking goes that a fire is
less likely to spread to a neighboring house if there's 12' of yard between
them. While I can somewhat understand that argument, part of me wonders how
realistic the worry is. When was the last time downtown burned to the ground? Or
the neighborhoods of close knit shotgun homes? At the very least, Kenwick's
almost 100 years in existence shows that we could lower the required space and
still be ok.

#### Apartment bans (aka Single Family Zoning)

All these problems imply that you are even allowed to build a multifamily
building, which is not the case for most of Lexington. That majority of existing
residential land is zoned as one of the R-1 zones. These zones mandate single
family housing and all except R-1T (Townhouse Residential) require it to be
single family detached housing. This means if you lived in one of the R-1 zones
and wanted to remodel your home into a duplex, let's say to downsize or get some
additional income, you would have to get a zone change. This is a long process,
6-9 months minimum, and requires approval from both the planning commission and
the city council. There is also public comment where your neighbors can scuttle
the whole project, after you've invested time and money, for no other reason
than it would slightly change the neighborhood. Funnily enough, if you were to
rent out a spare bedroom, that's completely fine and doesn't even require a
permit, let alone an act of council. Why is that?

It didn't use to be like this. Very few of our city's older multifamily
buildings were the first buildings on their lots. Before the car and
exclusionary zoning a neighborhood was allowed to grow and evolve as time went
on. Usually starting as a single family neighborhood that grew with the city.
Then perhaps one property is converted into a small corner store. From there
maybe a few more buildings are converted to other retail and commercial uses,
resulting in a small neighborhood commercial district. All of this was allowed
to happen naturally and at the behest of the property owners. The new retail
attracted more residents and more single family homes were converted to or
replaced with duplexes, fourplexes, and the like. This was a slow process that
occurred over decades.

![Multiunit near UK]({{site.baseurl}}/assets/img/illegal-housing-2.png)

Today such slow and incremental growth is nearly impossible. No one looks to
convert their home to a duplex because they don't want to deal with the long,
arduous zoning change process. They may not even be able to because converting
to a duplex would require more parking than they have or can build. So the
result is you're left with expensive single family homes that continue to
increase in price because there's more demand than supply. Prices keep
increasing until it gets to the point that redevelopment makes financial sense.
That redevelopment will probably be much larger than what it's replacing in
order to satisfy the parking and other zoning requirements, as
well as to justify the cost, much to the chagrin of the neighborhood.

#### Re-legalize housing

It wasn't like this before and it doesn't have to be like this today. We need to
re-legalize the housing that we used to build. This will require both changes in
our zoning code, but also from neighborhoods themselves. We need to realize that
our neighborhoods grow and change with the city as a whole. Attempts to stop
that change just serve to increase the burdens on the city through increased
housing costs, but, more often than not, results in a worse change. So I
encourage you to look around some of the older neighborhoods in Lexington. Then
ask yourself if it could be built today.